on April 24th with, sorry, what's your first name?
Mr. Menke, or you could say Gary Menke. Okay, Gary
Menke, PhD. Correct. Okay.
Over there. Okay. Hey, first off, can you just tell
me a little background about yourself? Where were
you born, your parents, education, things like
that? Okay. I was born in Cumberland, Maryland in
1940. I'm the son of a regional game warden for the
state of Maryland. And my mother was an insurance
salesperson, or I guess a secretary that worked in
an insurance office. So I grew up on the East Coast
in Maryland. and went to school at West Virginia
University, where I got a master's degree. And
then after my master's degree, I went in the Peace
Corps. And when I came back from the Peace Corps, I
went to get a Ph.D. at the University of Missouri.
Okay, so you grew up mostly in Maryland? Right.
Okay, what were your motives or influences that
caused you to join the Peace Corps? Well, first
off, I was intrigued with the idea when the Peace
Corps notion first came out. I guess it was a Hubert
Humphrey idea that was caught by Jack Kennedy, and
he had a lot of real magnetism and dynamism, and he
really invigorated a lot of young people. And my
sister went in the Peace Corps, I guess, in one of
the first phases of it. And she spent two years in
Tanzania. And she was very successful in that
operation. So she decided to re-up for a second two
years. And the time she was going for her second two
years, my roommate, Richard Rodman, was thinking
about the Peace Corps. He was doing some graduate
studies at West Virginia University and he went in
the Peace Corps and went to Ecuador. So I was
getting letters from Rodman and I was also getting
letters from my sister. And so I was, you know,
pretty well plugged into what was going on with the
Peace Corps. So when I graduated with my master's
degree, I thought, well, I couldn't really decide
whether I wanted to teach or not. And then came this
opportunity to do a university education program
that Bolivia wanted and so I said you know this is a
good opportunity to teach actually with the
master's degree and then if I decide that you know
that's something that I want to pursue as a career
that I can go back and get a PhD. You mentioned about
the effect of JFK had on your decision. Can you
expand a little bit on that? Okay, well Jack
Kennedy of course in his challenge to all
Americans to ask not what their country can do for
them but what they can do for their country. I think
that people started thinking outwardly and so it
was something that challenged all of us and I think
it perhaps gave us a little bit more of the zeal to
look for new opportunities and When he was killed,
I guess, Lyndon Johnson took over, and that's
about the time when I went into the B squad.
Okay.
Did you use these skills you got from your
education you were mentioning? Were you asked to
do something that was relative to that, or was it a
task totally different from what you were trained
to do? No, I used, of course, all my university
education. It was both a teaching job and using
some of the training that I had as a a geologist. I
had a master's degree in geology with a minor in
math. So I decided to. And what they wanted at the
University of San Andres in La Paz, Bolivia, they
were interested in several courses. And so I
taught two geology courses, and I taught a couple
of math courses. to high school
students who were preparing for college. They
were getting ready to take their university
entrance exams. And so I taught in a night school
English and two math courses to help them in their
preparatory to the year. entrance exams. Did you
speak Spanish before you left? I had 12 hours of
college Spanish, and what we did in the first part
of the Peace Corps is that we actually kind of
immersed ourselves in Spanish, did about five
hours of Spanish a day. And then we went off to the
Olympic Peninsula and actually did some practice
teaching in Spanish. And then as soon as we got in
country, it was a little while before the actual
school program started. So for that first six
months while we were getting involved in the
universities, learning the system, we were also
taking private tutor lessons in country. and
living with Bolivian families where we had to
continually speak. So by the time we had to begin
teaching in Spanish, we were fairly well
prepared.
You mentioned you went to Bolivia. Where else were
you sent in your stay in the Peace Corps? That was
it. We spent two years in Bolivia. I say we. the
woman that I eventually married were in the same
Peace Corps training program, and so we were both
down there together. Did you all request to go to
Bolivia together? No, we separately were
thinking about the Peace Corps and just happened
to, I didn't actually know her before Peace Corps
training, so we met in Peace Corps training at the
University of Washington in Seattle. But did you
request Bolivia, you personally? No. No, it was
just I had written to the Peace Corps and said that I
would be interested in information about new
programs coming out. And the summer after I got my
master's degree, they wrote to me and said we've
got a program just starting up and we're prepared
to wire you tickets if you want to join the program.
So it was something I had to make a decision pretty
quickly because I also had a summer job lined up
with Shell Oil Company that summer and so it was
kind of difficult to make that decision, but it was
something that I wanted to do, so I had to cancel one
job and quickly change gears and get into the other
one. What year was that that you started? That was
in 1964. And that was the first year of the Peace
Corps? No, it had started, I think, already in
about 1960 or 61. just after Jack Kennedy took
office. So I think it was perhaps 60 or 61 that it
really started. So I was in the sort of the second or
third bunch of Peace Corps volunteers. Had
already been one group of Peace Corps volunteers
in Bolivia by the time
we got there. Was there any other reason that
motivated you to join? Did you get draft deferment
by doing this, or anything like that? Well, I was
not assured that you would have draft deferment.
At that time, there was some buildup of, actually,
we hadn't started building up in Vietnam yet,
because that was during the first years when
Johnson took over. We did have advisors over
there, and it was not certain whether people were
going to get deferments for being in Peace Corps
service. Certainly if you didn't make the
program, I mean, it was not assured just when you
went into Peace Corps training. that you were
going to be able to make the grade and actually be
what they were looking for. So obviously, if you
didn't succeed in the training program and you
weren't selected to do your in-country work, then
of course you would lose any chance of having a
deferment. But that wasn't a motivating factor.
It was just something that... The opportunity
came at the right moment for me just after I
graduated and actually had to, like I say, decide
not to take a summer job with an oil company, which
was a very interesting one and would have been an
also exciting thing to do. What was your
relationship like with your locals and how did you
find the culture?
Well, we took some Bolivian cultural training at
the University of Washington. We had actually
some Bolivians there. We had a lot of Latin
Americans that were on the staff. And we had some
Mexicans, some Argentines, and some Bolivians,
and some Ecuadorians that were part of the
instructors in the training program. And of
course, they helped us to prepare what the country
was going to be like, what the culture was going to
be like. And of course, you're never fully
prepared. But I think when we first got there, the
biggest distraction was that a revolution very
quickly broke out. president of the country,
Victor Paz Estensoro, at the time was required to
actually leave the country for his own protection
and there was a lot of heavy fighting that went on.
And so that also slowed down our initial
involvement in the country because There were
some snipers inside the university, and the
university got machine guns several times. And
there was a lot of damage that had to be repaired and
a lot of political turmoil that had to be quelled
and calmed down before things went back to normal.
So it kind of made it a difficult situation to start
into. and there was also a curfew that was put on, so
you couldn't get around too much in the evenings,
and so it made it a little more difficult to
actually see the
city, and you had to do everything during the
daytime hours. And you were in La Paz, is that
right? Uh-huh, in La Paz. What about with the
locals in the city? How did they treat you? We were
treated generally with pretty much respect. We
lived with the Bolivian family
and I think they were curious about Americans and
so I think they wanted to learn as much about us as we
wanted to learn about them. And it was also very
helpful because when we had difficult questions
to ask them about anything that was happening in
the culture, how should we react to different
situations, we could just go and explain it to
them, and they would be almost like our foster
guardians, and they could kind of tell us the best
way to act or the best way to handle the situations.
So I think that was, you know, good for both sides.
You mentioned the difference in culture that
you'd have to go and ask them about. What were some
of the customs that you found kind of strange or
different from the local customs you were
familiar with? Just for example. Well, let's see.
I think A lot of the things that you're not quite
used to, like, for example, when just something
that you want to get in line for a bus, get onto a bus,
or if you want to go to a movie, it's our culture that
we go, we stand in line, everything is orderly.
Sometimes this doesn't happen. In places like
Bolivia, you get there and you find out that the way
to form a waiting group for your ticket is to be in a
semicircle and everybody reaching around. And so
this is kind of annoying and disturbing to
somebody who doesn't understand the culture.
It's something, I guess, that we got to learn to get
used to. You don't want to generate
confrontations out of these things. At the same
time, you don't want to just stand back and, you
know, feel like that you're not going to get your
fair opportunity to do things. So that was
certainly one instance.
The teaching role itself, I think there's a lot of,
I wouldn't call them necessarily discipline
problems, but they certainly do like to challenge
the teachers and professors, and particularly if
they feel that you're somewhat of a curiosity then
you know they may decide to do things like call
boycotts of classes and then when you confront
them about you know why they did this well you know
they would come up with some kind of excuse like
well there's American involvement in the
Dominican Republic and so We're protesting. Now,
mind you, we don't have anything against you
personally, but we're kind of just trying to
demonstrate against that kind of thing. So you
never knew whether it was a serious thing or
whether they were just taking advantage of the
situation. So these were the things that we... We
had to learn how to deal with them. It was mainly
through talking to your counterparts in the
university and other professors and say, what
should we do? How should we handle it? So that's
basically some of the differences, I guess. What
did they say when you asked the department? Well, a
lot of times, they realized You know, there are
these times when political activism does take
over. And like I said, there had just been a
revolution. So everybody was a little bit on
tender hooks and didn't want to really stir up more
activity than they thought was necessary. We're
just going to have to learn to maximize the time we
do have with the students. If we create an
environment where they think that it's valuable
to come to class, then they will. So I think that's
what we try to do. I guess it worked out. Did you find
any friction between the Spanish Catholics and
the indigenous peoples, the Indians?
As far as I could recognize, I guess the only real
conflicts probably were not between people that
weren't Catholics necessarily, but they did have
what they called the evangelicals. And these
would be some of the other missionaries that are
doing work there. And most of the Indians that we
were involved with were actually converted to
Catholicism.
There were sometimes some I suppose you would say
competition between the various missionary
groups that were working there. But as far as we
could tell, there was never any real hostility
that came about because of religions.
there were a few Catholics that were in our Peace
Corps group, and others were, you know, I guess
different religions, and it really never seemed
to be an issue.
Okay. What was your daily routine like?
Daily routine was, I guess, pretty much the same as
a routine for any professor in the U.S. We were
preparing lesson plans and we would
I guess one thing that was kind of different is they
had kind of a practice of taking their little early
morning breaks, well not necessarily early
morning, but generally sometime around 10
o'clock they would take some kind of our coffee
break, we'd call it a coffee break, and there they
would take some time out to have what they called
the saltinas, which were kind of little
empanadas, and then they would have their drink,
which they called api, which is kind of like a
purple corn, hot corn drink. And so it was kind of
unusual, but we got to really liking this little
break that we would take at about 10 o'clock. And
you'd sit in a little cafe or something, and then
you could talk about different situations. And
it's almost like going into a faculty lounge or
something like that. The difference was that
after your classes were over, La
Paz is actually at about 12,000 feet. So it gets
really quite cool in the evenings. And you found
out that there was no central heat in the houses.
there wasn't a lot of refrigeration space or
anything like that so you wound up basically going
to the open markets after your classes were over
and you had to buy your food that you were going to
prepare for your evening meal and generally you
just kind of lived from buying for that day or maybe
for the morning or the next day. So you sort of
bought food for about two days at a time and you
didn't have really any way to preserve it or store
it. So you sort of bought in limited quantities and
used it quickly.
And then of course you would start to work on your
either grading papers or preparing for next day's
teaching assignment. Sometimes you would also be
teaching night classes. So we had these high
school kids from Tupac Atari night school that
were preparing for college entrance exams, which
they called the cursos visticulares. And so we
would get ready to go over and teach them. Also, we
had some blind girls, the Ciegitas, which they
were sort of personal friends of one of the people
that we met there. And so we decided to go over and
spend some time with them. They were actually
quite good singers. And as it turns out, later on
when we got married, as kind of paying us back for
the time that we spent, they actually came and sang
at our wedding. And so we had a recording of their
singing at our wedding. It was really pretty
special to us. That's a good transition, because
my next question was, what was it like being
married in the Peace Corps? Well, I guess being
married in the Peace Corps is like being married
anywhere, but certainly it was a very different
situation to be married in a big Latin American
church where you knew very few people, and yet the
church was actually packed. We had the whole
square that was filling up, and the buzz word was
going around that there was a gringo wedding that
was going to take place. And so when it came time to
actually have the wedding ceremony, the whole
church was filled. This was a church that was a big,
high vaulted church with a very ornate altar and
everything. The floor of the church was actually
dirt. It was a dirt floor. In the tape of the
wedding, you could actually hear some of the
people sucking on oranges or some of them might be
nursing children or whatever. So it was really
quite a different setting for a wedding. And, of
course, most of the ceremonies there were all, of
course, in Spanish, so that also made it quite
different. But La Paz, you know, being very high,
surrounded by mountains with snow-capped peaks,
and it's a really very picturesque-type setting,
and, of course, It's just something very special
to us to have all these sort of very different kinds
of memories about our early experiences
there. Are we going to say something? Well, of
course. Being married in a foreign country and not
having all the conveniences that you would have if
you were starting off in the U.S., I guess it made it
more challenging because just for simple things
like cooking, It was quite challenging to prepare
a meal on just two little hot plate burners, not
having any storage facilities, and then simple
things like taking a bath with really no hot water.
You had to heat the water on the stove and then mix in
a bucket with cold water to get it sort of warm. And
then you splash that on yourself in order to take
baths. So that was certainly a challenging thing.
Most young people just getting married would
probably find that kind of living rather
challenging too. Did either of your parents find?
No. We have no one from either one of our families
that was there. That was one of the things, I guess,
that also made it more of an isolated thing. We did
send them the tape of our wedding ceremony, which I
guess was something. But still, other than the
pictures and the tape, they had to certainly
experience it all vicariously from our accounts
of it.
Were they very upset about that? It wasn't like you
eloped or anything? No, I guess they realized that
both of us were doing things that they probably
wouldn't have considered at the time when they
were growing up. To go off and go to a foreign
country and to get married in that foreign country
and so forth. I guess was probably pretty foreign
to
try to actually plan to go and attend the wedding. I
guess it was probably more than we could arrange.
Certainly my parents would never think of getting
on an airplane and flying to a foreign country. So I
guess that was just kind of out of the question.
Y'all had your first child when you were in the
Peace Corps. Yes, our first child, David, was born
at the end of our Peace Corps term there. So shortly
after, he was born in April, I guess, and our Peace
Corps two-year period ended in, I think it was
September? I guess it was June. And so we just had a
few months there where we were also. But it was kind
of interesting. My wife, Joy, was pregnant at the
time she was finishing her teaching assignment at
the University of La Paz, or San Andres in La Paz,
Bolivia. It just turns out that the day that she
turned in her final grades for the classes, I guess
the baby was born the next day. So I guess that was
pretty good timing. What were the hospital
facilities like? Well, the hospital facilities
were certainly, I guess you would say,
challenging.
She had the baby. which is a very little missionary
hospital. There was one missionary doctor there.
It was Dr. Thompson, I think.